Add TAP introducing snapshot Merkle trees (#125)
theupdateframework/taps: candidate-snapshot-merkle-tap.md

* TAP:
* Title: Snapshot Merkle Trees
* Version: 0
* Last-Modified: 17/09/2020
* Author: Marina Moore, Justin Cappos
* Type: Standardization
* Status: Draft
* Content-Type: markdown
* Created: 14/09/2020
* +TUF-Version:
* +Post-History:

>  # Abstract

Reviewer: This chapter feels quite heavy on technical detail and light on the high level impact of this TAP

>  To optimize the snapshot metadata file size for large registries, registries

Reviewer: registry? is this the same as repository?

 and third-party auditors download the prior snapshot Merkle trees and check
 that the version numbers did not decrease at any point. To make this scalable
 as the number of timestamps increases, the client will only download version
 information signed by the current timestamp file. Thus, rotating this key
 enables the registry to discard old snapshot Merkle tree data.

The feature described in this TAP does not need to be implemented by all TUF
implementations. It is an option for any adopter who is interested in the
benefits provided by this feature, but may not make sense for implementations
with fewer target files.

# Motivation

For very large repositories, the snapshot metadata file could get very large.
This snapshot metadata file must be downloaded on every update cycle, and so
could significantly impact the metadata overhead. For example, if a repository
has 50,000,000 targets, the snapshot metadata will be about 380,000,000 bytes
(https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/18iwWnWvAAZ4In33EWJBgdAWVFE720B_z0eQlB4FpjNc/edit?ts=5ed7d6f4#gid=0).
For this reason, it is necessary to create a more scalable solution for snapshot

> metadata that does not significantly impact the security properties of TUF.

Reviewer: The reasoning seems sound but the wording is misleading I think: the issue isn't the number of targets alone but the design decision of 1 target per metadata file? So it would be more accurate to say 

> For example, if a repository
> ￼has 10,000,000 target metadata files, the snapshot metadata will be about 380,000,000 bytes

or did I misunderstand? (it's entirely possible: I'm not able to understand most of the spreadsheet with the context I have)

metadata file for each target. The repository generates these snapshot Merkle
metadata files by building a Merkle tree using all target files and storing the
path to each target in the snapshot Merkle metadata. The root of this Merkle
tree is stored in timestamp metadata to allow for client verification. The
client uses the path stored in the snapshot Merkle metadata for a target, along
with the root of the Merkle tree, to ensure that metadata is from the given
Merkle tree. The details of these files and procedures are described in
this section.

![Diagram of snapshot Merkle tree](merkletap-1.jpg)

## Merkle tree generation

When the repository generates snapshot metadata, instead of putting the version
information for all targets into a single file, it instead uses the version
information to generate a Merkle tree.  Each target’s version information forms
a leaf of the tree, then these leaves are used to build a Merkle tree. The
internal nodes of a Merkle tree contain the hash of the leaf nodes. The exact
algorithm for generating this Merkle tree (ie the order of leaves in the hash,
how version information is encoded), is left to the implementer, but this

> algorithm should be documented in a POUF so that implementations can be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
algorithm should be documented in a [POUF](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/blob/master/tap11.md) so that implementations can be
```

Merkle tree, third-party auditors should validate the entire tree each time it
is updated. Auditors should download every snapshot Merkle file, verify the
paths, check the root hash against the hash provided in timestamp metadata,
and ensure that the version information has not decreased for each target.
Alternatively, the repository may provide auditors with information about the
contents and ordering of leaf nodes so that the auditors can more efficiently
verify the entire tree.

Auditors may provide an additional signature for timestamp metadata that
indicates that they have verified the contents of the Merkle tree whose root
is in that timestamp file. Using this signature, clients can check whether a
particular third party has approved the Merkle tree.

## Garbage collection
When a threshold of timestamp keys are revoked and replaced, the repository no
longer needs to store snapshot Merkle files signed by the previous timestamp
key. Replacing the timestamp key is an opportunity for fast forward attack
recovery, and so all version information from before the replacement is no
longer valid. At this point, the repository may garbage collect all snapshot
Merkle metadata files.

> # Security Analysis

Reviewer 2: I like the descriptions and analysis of these attacks, although I think it could be made clearer to non-experts by illustrating a short and concrete example. WDYT?

This proposal impacts the snapshot metadata, so this section will discuss the
attacks that are mitigated by snapshot metadata in TUF.

## Rollback attack

In the event that the timestamp key is compromised, an attacker may provide an
invalid Merkle tree that contains a previous version of a target. This attack
is prevented by both the client’s verification and by auditors. When the client
verifies previous versions of the snapshot Merkle metadata for a target, they
ensure that the version number of that target has not decreased. However, if
the attacker controls the timestamp key(s) and the repository, the previous
snapshot Merkle metadata downloaded by the client may also be invalid. To
protect against this case, third party auditors store the previous version of
all metadata, and will detect when the version number decreases in a new
Merkle tree. As long as the client checks for an auditor’s verification, the

> client will not install the rolled-back version of the target.

Reviewer: I think this should be clear about how this proposal compares to current situation -- both when clients accept only 3rd party audited trees and when auditors are not used. 

This actually applies to all security impact sections: Clear comparison to status quo would be great

## Fast forward attack

If an attacker is able to compromise the timestamp key, they may arbitrarily
increase the version number of a target in the snapshot Merkle metadata. If
they increase it to a sufficiently large number (say the maximum integer value),
the client will not accept any future version of the target as the version
number will be below the previous version. To recover from this attack,
auditors and clients should not check version information from before a
timestamp key replacement. This allows a timestamp key replacement to be used
as a reset after a fast forward attack. The existing system handles fast
forward attack recovery in a similar manner, by instructing clients to delete
stored version information after a timestamp key replacement.

> ## Mix and match attack

Reviewer 2: Yes, but I think it's important to clarify that although mix-and-match attacks by MitM attackers are not possible, they are possible to do by attackers who control timestamp and snapshot keys.

* Version: 0
* Last-Modified: 17/09/2020
* Author: Marina Moore, Justin Cappos
* Type: Standardization
* Status: Draft
* Content-Type: markdown
* Created: 14/09/2020
* +TUF-Version:
* +Post-History:

# Abstract

To optimize the snapshot metadata file size for large repositories, repositories
can use a snapshot Merkle tree to conceptually store version information about
all images in a single snapshot without needing to distribute this entire
snapshot to all clients. To do so, it puts version information for each targets
metadata file into a leaf of the Merkle tree, and distributes snapshot Merkle
files containing this leaf information and a path to the root of the Merkle tree.
Clients can then compare this information with a Merkle root provided in the
timestamp metadata. To prove that there has not been a reversion of the
snapshot Merkle tree when downloading an image, the client and third-party
auditors download the prior snapshot Merkle trees and check that the version
numbers did not decrease at any point.

By replacing a single snapshot metadata file with individual snapshot Merkle
metadata files, this TAP reduces the metadata overhead for repositories with

> large numbers of targets metadata files.

Author: Good idea, I added a sentence below

algorithm should be documented in a [POUF](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/blob/master/tap11.md)
so that implementations can be
compatible and correctly verify Merkle tree data. However, all implementations
should meet the following requirements:
* Leaf nodes must be unique. A unique identifier of the target, such as the
filepath or hash must be included in the leaf data to ensure that no two leaf
node hashes are the same.
* The tree must be a Merkle tree. Each internal node must contain a hash that
includes both leaf nodes.

Once the Merkle tree is generated, the repository must create a snapshot Merkle
metadata file for each target. This file must contain the leaf contents and
the path to the root of the Merkle tree. This path must contain the hashes of
sibling nodes needed to reconstruct the tree during verification (see diagram).
In addition the path should contain direction information so that the client
will know whether each node is a left or right sibling when reconstructing the
tree.

This information will be included in the following metadata format:
```
{ “leaf_contents”: {METAFILES},
  “Merkle_path”: {INDEX:HASH}
  “path_directions”:{INDEX:DIR}

> }

Reviewer 3: I think is worthwhile to scope out how the hash algorithm is specified, in case we wanted to switch implementations over time, both for how a hash tree is computed (for example, I just found out about [Verkle Trees](https://math.mit.edu/research/highschool/primes/materials/2019/conf/12-5-Kuszmaul.pdf)), and the underlying hash algorithm itself.

Author: The current design leaves the hash algorithm to the implementer (to be specified in a POUF). Although, it might be nice to include the algorithm in the timestamp metadata along with the root hash so that the algorithm could change over time without needing a major version release.

Switching from a Merkle tree to something like a Verkle tree might be trickier without a major version release as it changes the whole algorithm for computation rather than just the hash algorithm used.

If this field is included, the client should use snapshot Merkle metadata to
verify updates instead:

```
("merkle_root": ROOT_HASH)
```

Where `ROOT_HASH` is the hash of the Merkle tree root.

Note that snapshot Merkle metadata files do not need to be signed by a snapshot
key because the path information will be verified based on the Merkle root
provided in timestamp. Removing these signatures will provide additional space
savings for clients.

## Merkle tree verification

If a client sees the `merkle_root` field in timestamp metadata, they will use
the snapshot Merkle metadata to check version information. If this field is
present, the client will download the snapshot Merkle metadata file only for
the targets metadata the client is attempting to update. The client will verify the
snapshot Merkle metadata file by reconstructing the Merkle tree and comparing
the computed root hash to the hash provided in timestamp metadata. If the
hashes do not match, the snapshot Merkle metadata is invalid. Otherwise, the
client will use the version information in the verified snapshot Merkle
metadata to proceed with the update.

> For additional rollback protection, the client may download previous versions

Reviewer 4: Is it possible to do this with the PoC for the reference implementation? The files in tests/repository_data/repository/metadata are of the fixed form METADATA_ROLENAME-snapshot.json. How do we identify a previous version to download?

Author: This isn't possible in the current implementation. I can update the implementation to use consistent snapshots to access previous Merkle trees.

Author: I added consistent snapshots to all Merkle tree files in the [PoC](https://github.com/theupdateframework/tuf/pull/1113/commits/342b58fbf661f351cd486d5e098a18529f709093).

of the snapshot Merkle metadata for the given targets metadata file. After verifying
these files, the client should compare the version information in the previous
Merkle trees to the information in the current Merkle tree to ensure that the
version numbers have never decreased. In order to allow for fast forward attack
recovery (discussed further in Security Analysis), the client should only
download previous versions that were signed with the same timestamp key.

## Auditing Merkle trees

In order to ensure the validity of all targets metadata version information in the
Merkle tree, third-party auditors should validate the entire tree each time it
is updated. Auditors should download every snapshot Merkle file, verify the
paths, check the root hash against the hash provided in timestamp metadata,
and ensure that the version information has not decreased for each leaf.
Alternatively, the repository may provide auditors with information about the
contents and ordering of leaf nodes so that the auditors can more efficiently

> verify the entire tree.

Reviewer 4: I'd appreciate some discussion here of what happens if an auditor starts watching a repository that has already gone through several Merkle tree generations. Is it a problem that the auditor hasn't validated all trees generated by the repository?

Reviewer 4: From context in the security analysis section below, I think an auditor is valid so long as it has the full Merkle tree since the last timestamp key rotation?

Author: I added a paragraph about fast forward attack recovery that describes which versions should be verified by new auditors

is in that timestamp file. Using this signature, clients can check whether a
particular third party has approved the Merkle tree.

## Garbage collection

When a threshold of timestamp keys are revoked and replaced, the repository no
longer needs to store snapshot Merkle files signed by the previous timestamp
key. Replacing the timestamp key is an opportunity for fast forward attack
recovery, and so all version information from before the replacement is no
longer valid. At this point, the repository may garbage collect all snapshot
Merkle metadata files.

# Security Analysis

This proposal impacts the snapshot metadata, so this section will discuss the
attacks that are mitigated by snapshot metadata in TUF.

## Rollback attack

A rollback attack provides a client with an old, previously valid view of
the repository. Using this attack, an attacker could convince a client to
install a version from before a security patch was released.

TUF currently protects against rollback attacks by checking the current time
signed by timestamp and ensuring that no version information provided by
snapshot has decreased since the last update. With both of these protections,

> the client is secure against a rollback attack to any version released

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
a client that has a copy of trusted metadata is secure against a rollback attack to any version released
```
somewhat implicit in the "before the previous update cycle" below, but possibly worth being explicit

before the previous update cycle, even if the timestamp and snapshot keys
are compromised.

Using snapshot Merkle trees, rollback attacks are prevented by both the
client verification and by third party auditors. If no keys are compromised,
the timestamp keys protect against a rollback attack by ensuring a valid
snapshot Merkle tree. If the timestamp key is compromised, the client

> verification of previous Merkle trees provides rollback protection for the

Reviewer 4: Is this only for a client with previously downloaded Merkle trees? Or are we suggesting that a client could (should?) download previous Merkle trees to ensure the targets metadata file they are downloading isn't susceptible to a rollback attack (I think so based on context below)? In which case, I'd like to see the TAP suggest when the download of previous snapshot Merkle trees might be performed and how.

Author: I added a description of the client previous tree verification to the `Merkle tree verification` section.
